well howdy there Internet people its Bo
again so tonight we are going to talk
about a closely held idea an idea that
many many people believe and accept at
face value they believe that it's true
and we're going to explore whether or
not there's any evidence to back it up
like a lot of ideas that people just
accept that evidence may not be there
tonight will be a little different in
the sense that I may not have an answer
at the end normally when I make a video
I have an answer of some kind to the
topic being discussed it may not be an
answer you like it is certainly not an
answer that I demand you accept but I
have some form of an answer may not have
one this time because this topic is
pretty cloudy so what's the idea in
question anytime somebody presents any
form of critique about capitalism about
free trade somebody shows up to say you
know capitalism has raised a bazillion
jillion people out of poverty and we're
going to talk about whether or not
that's true
when somebody says this and you ask them
for a source if they are willing to give
you one nine times out of ten they're
going to point you to world bank numbers
there's a lot of problems with that if
you don't know how it works basically
two dollars a days the cut off if you
are getting by on less than two dollars
a day while you're in poverty over two
dollars day you're not magic you can
already see some issues with that going
from a dollar ninety-nine a day to two
dollars and one cent a day does not
probably does not meaningfully change
your view of whether or not you're in
poverty and the reality is poverty is
more of a feeling than a fact in a lot
of ways
now sometimes yeah if you can't eat
you're obviously in poverty but aside
from that it's comparative it's relative
to what's around you now when you look
at those numbers what they show is that
yeah a whole lot of people since the end
of the Cold War or whatever have been
raised out of poverty it shows that it
does not draw attention to the fact that
those countries that benefited the most
from that jump are not free market
economies they're like China you know
they stay directed economy or they are
economies that engage in protectionist
behavior it it's just not there aside
from that it it doesn't show a causal
relationship it shows correlation these
two things happen at the same time that
the numbers aren't really there for that
so let's try to look at some other
numbers okay
the US we obviously have good numbers on
poverty in the u.s. right from 1959 on
we do prior to that it's a lot of
estimates now I will say the estimates
that I've seen they make sense you know
the 1950s was seen as an era of
prosperity it would make sense that in
the depression there was a higher rate
of poverty so they work okay but at the
same time our capitalist economy of
today is based in consumerism and that
came about in the 50s so we really don't
even need to get into the guesswork we
can just stick with the numbers that we
have what are those numbers in 1959
somewhere between one and four and one
and five rough estimate
people was in poverty in the US that's
pretty high I mean that's a big chunk
when you get to 2016 2017 it's closer to
1 in 10
well here's your proof consumerism
capitalism free markets all of that it
worked almost cut it in half again that
is a correlation it's not causation
threw out another set of numbers for you
in 1930 the public social spending as a
share of the gross domestic product was
0.56 okay very low less than a full
percent in 1960 it was 6.2 percent and
in 2016 it was nineteen point three two
percent this is money that is spent to
get people out of poverty who would have
thought it got people out of poverty but
that's not capitalism but that's also
not real evidence it's correlation it's
not causation we don't have it the data
I don't have the data to show how
effective those programs were the
reality is this entire debate seems to
be very centered on correlation and when
you're doing that you can find evidence
to tell you anything but what's the main
argument what's the main question what
why is this said the idea is that
capitalism is a force for good in the
world if that's what you're trying to
find out just evaluate whether or not
capitalism is a force for good in the
world it's all you have to do you don't
really need the numbers it is a moral
judgment it's very subjective do you
believe that a system that encourages
the very worst in human behavior is a
force for
good in the world it's one way it could
be phrased somebody who supported
capitalism earnestly could phrase it a
different way
I would suggest given the fact that this
week two major coffee companies have
been accused of having eight-year-olds
in their supply chains gathering their
coffee and that Nike and Adidas
and Apple were all accused of having
forced labor in their supply chains then
maybe the free market isn't so free and
it's not a rarity that happens all the
time it's a very common occurrence for
large corporations to be exploited is it
a facet of capitalism so well I don't
have an answer to that question and I
don't think anybody does to be honest I
think anybody who is telling you for
certain one way or the other either
isn't thinking about it clearly isn't
factoring in the fact that innovation
and improvements in distribution have
something to do with this as well we
didn't touch on that they're either not
thinking about it in depth they're being
disingenuous or they got access to
numbers I don't have they have data that
I do not have and while I don't have an
answer to that I do have a course of
action that you can take no matter what
your answer is what are you doing
standing around
you're a part of this system whether you
approve of it or you don't you're a part
of it and because you're a part of it
you have the ability to influence it
where you work where you play what you
do where you lay your money down what
you say all feeds into that system if
you want to change it you can it's up to
you it starts right now in your own
backyard in your own hometown you can
make small changes you can vote with
your dollar this is a question that
we're going to have to look into and
we're going to need our data because if
we are looking for systemic change we
may need to adjust a whole lot and the
economic system that has led to the
world we have today it it has impacts
far beyond poverty a lot of issues that
dole climate change may have something
to do with it this system that rewards
exploiting and packaging and turning
everything into a product rewards
products being thrown out planned
obsolescence
this is these are all behaviors that are
encouraged by capitalism maybe it can be
reformed maybe it has to be changed it's
a question for you guys that not me
anyway it's just a thought y'all have a
good night